# Assignment 1: Classifier By Hand


In this assignment, you learn step by step how to code a binary classifier by hand! 

Don't worry, it will be guided through.

## Introduction: calorimeter showers
A calorimeter in the context of experimental particle physics is a sub-detector aiming at measuring the energy of incoming particles. At CERN Large Hadron Collider, the giant multipurpose detectors [ATLAS](https://atlas.cern/Discover/Detector/Calorimeter) and CMS are both equipped with electromagnetic and hadronic calorimeters. The electronic calorimeter, as its name indicates, is measuring the energy of incoming electrons. It is a destructive method: the energetic electron entering the calorimeter will interact with its dense material via the electromagnetic force. It eventually results in the generation of a shower of particles (electromagnetic shower), with a characteristic average depth and width. The depth is along the direction of the incoming particle and the width is the dimension perpendicular to it.
 
Problem? There can be noisy signals in electromagnetic calorimeters that are generated by hadrons, not electrons. 

Your mission is to help physicists by coding a classifier to select electron-showers (signal) from hadron-showers (background). 

To this end, you are given a dataset of shower characterists from previous measurements where the incoming particle was known. The main features are the depth and the width. 

```{figure} ../images/a01_showers.png
---
  name: a01_showers
  width: 90%
---
Visualization of an electron shower (left) and hadron shower (right).  
 <sub>From [ResearchGate](https://www.researchgate.net/figure/The-different-character-of-electromagneticgamma-and-hadronic-showers-19_fig2_270824497)</sub>
```
Hadron showers are on average longer in the direction of the incoming hadron (depth) and large in the transverse direction (width).
```{figure} ../images/a01_showers_distribs.png
---
  name: a01_showers_distribs
  width: 100%
---
```
````{margin}
```{admonition} Dataset
Find the repository on GDrive [here](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1hVq0gnDeQvQ7dIvl0bPTyJn9DGMscqwc?usp=sharing).
```
````

## 1. Get the Data
Download the dataset and put it on your GDrive. Open a new Jupyter-notebook from [Google-Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/). To mount your drive:
```python
from google.colab import drive
drive.mount('/content/gdrive')
```

For the following, import the NumPy and pandas libraries:
```python
import sys, os
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
```

__1.1 Get and load the data__  
Read the dataset into a dataframe `df`. What are the columns? Which column stores the labels (targets)?

__1.2 How many samples are there?__  


## 2. Feature Scaling

__2.1 Explain with math__  
Before coding, explain using the mathematical expressions seen in Lecture 3 on Logistic Regression why the gradient descent is likely to diverge if features are not rescaled.

_Hint 1: recall that the $\boldsymbol{\theta}$ parameters are usually initialized with random numbers from 0 and 1._  
_Hint 1.1: they are positive..._  
_Hint 2: recall the shape of the sigmoid and what it would imply on the cost function, especially for background samples._  

__2.2 Standarization__  
Create for each input feature an extra column in the dataframe to rescale it to a distribution of zero-mean and unit-variance. To see statistical information on a dataframe, a convenient method is:
```python
df.describe()
```
We will take $x_1$ and $x_2$ in the order of the dataframe's columns. By searching in the documentation for methods retrieving the mean and standard deviation, complete the following code:
```python
MEAN_X1  =
SIGMA_X1 =   
MEAN_X2  =
SIGMA_X2 =  

df['shower_depth_scaled'] = 
df['shower_width_scaled'] = 
```

_Hint: recall {prf:ref}`defStandardization` and the equation to scale a feature according to the standardization method._

Check your results by calling `df.describe()` on the updated dataframe.

## 3. Data Prep
Let's make the dataset ready for the classifier. As seen in class, the hypothesis function in the linear assumption has the dot product $\sum_{j=0}^n x^{(i)}_j \theta_j =  x^{(i)} \theta^{\; T}$, where by convention $x_0 = 1$. With 2 input features, there are two parameters to optimize for each feature and the intercept term $\theta_0$. To perform the dot product above, let's add to the dataframe a column:

__3.1 Adding x0 column__  
Add a column `x0` to the dataframe `df` filled entirely with ones.

__3.2 Matrix X__  
Create a new dataframe `X` that contain the `x0` column and the columns of the two __scaled__ input features.

__3.3 Labels to binary__  
The target column contains alphabetical labels. Create an extra column in your dataframe called `y` containing 1 if the sample is an electron shower and 0 if it is a hadron one.  

_Hint: you can first create an extra column full of 0, then apply a filter using the `.loc` property from DataFrame. It can be in the form:_
```python
df.loc[ CONDITION, COLUMN_TO_UPDATE] = VALUE
```
Read the [pandas documentation on `.loc`](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/reference/api/pandas.DataFrame.loc.html). 

__3.4 Vector y__  
Extract from the dataframe this `y` column with the binary labels in a separate dataframe `y`.

## 4. DataFrames to Numpy
The inputs are almost ready, yet there are still some steps. As we saw in Lecture 3 in Part {ref}`class:algs:perf`, we need to split the dataset in a training and a testing sets. We will use the very convenient `train_test_split` method from Sciki-Learn. Then, we convert the resulting dataframes to NumPy arrays. This Python library is the standard in data science. In this assignment, you will manipulate NumPy arrays and build the foundations you need to master the programming aspect of machine learning.

Copy this code into your notebook:

```python
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split

X_train_df, X_test_df, y_train_df, y_test_df = train_test_split( X, y, test_size=0.2, random_state=42)

X_train = X_train_df.to_numpy() ; y_train = y_train_df.to_numpy()
X_test  = X_test_df.to_numpy()  ; y_test  = y_test_df.to_numpy()
```

__4.1 Shapes__  
Show the dimensions of the four NumPy arrays using the `.shape` property. Comment the numbers with respect to the notations defined in class. Does it make sense?

__4.2 Test size__  
Looking at the shapes, explain what `test_size` represents.


## 5. Useful Functions
We saw a lot of functions in the lectures: hypothesis, logistic, cost, etc. We will code these functions as python functions to make the code more modular and easier to read.


```{warning}
In the following you will work with __two dimensional__ NumPy arrays. Make sure the objects you declare in the code have the correct dimension (number of rows and number of columns).
```
````{margin}
```{admonition} Resource
:class: seealso
A great tutorial: "How to Index, Slice and Reshape NumPy Arrays for Machine Learning" from Jason Brownlee on [machinelearningmastery.com](https://machinelearningmastery.com/index-slice-reshape-numpy-arrays-machine-learning-python/). 
```
```{important}
It is important that you test your functions to make sure they work and return coherent values. Create dummy arrays of just a couple of rows and the correct amount of columns, compute the expected values with a simple calculator to check. In your final notebook however, remove these checks for clarity and conciseness.
```
````
To help you, look at the examples below.  
This creates a 2 x 3 matrix:
```
>>> a = np.array([[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6]])
>>> a
array([[1, 2, 3],
       [4, 5, 6]])
>>> a.shape
(2, 3)
```
This is a list:
```
>>> b = [1, 2, 3]
>>> type(b)
<class 'list'>
```

This makes a __1D__ NumPy array:
```
>>> b = np.array([1, 2, 3])
>>> b.shape
(3,)
```

This declares a __2D__ NumPy array with one row (aka arow vector): 
```
>>> c = np.array([[1, 2, 3]])
>>> c
array([[1, 2, 3]])
>>> c.shape
(1, 3)
```

````{margin}
```{admonition} Resource
:class: seealso
Understand the [Basic Operations](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/user/quickstart.html#basic-operations) with NumPy arrays.
```
````
__5.1 Linear Sum__  
Write a function computing the linear sum of the features $X$ with the $\boldsymbol{\theta}$ parameters for each input sample.
```{math}
z(\boldsymbol{x^{(i)}}) = \sum_{j=0}^n x^{(i)}_j \theta_j
```
```python
def lin_sum(X, thetas):

  # Your code here 

```
What should be the dimensions of the returned object? Make sure your function returns a 2D array with the correct shape. 

__5.2 Logistic Function__  
Write a function computing the logistic function:
```python
def sigmoid(z):

  # Your code here 

```

__5.3 Hypothesis Function__  
Using the two functions above, write the hypothesis function $h_\theta(\boldsymbol{x^{(i)}})$:
```python
def h_class(X, thetas):

  # Your code here 
```

__5.4 Partial Derivatives of Cross-Entropy Cost Function__  
In the linear assumption where $z(\boldsymbol{x^{(i)}}) = \sum_{j=0}^n \theta_j x^{(i)}_j$, the partial derivatives of the cross-entropy cost function are:
```{math}
\frac{\partial}{\partial \theta_j} J(\theta) = \frac{1}{m} \sum_{i=1}^{m} \left( h_\theta(x^{(i)}) -  y^{(i)}\right) x_j^{(i)}
```
Write a function that takes __three column vectors__ (m $\times$ 1) and computes the partial derivatives $\frac{\partial}{\partial \theta_j} J(\theta)$ for a given feature $j$:
```python
def derivatives_cross_entropy(y_preds, y_obs, x_feature):

  # Your code here

```
Hint: perform an array operation to store all the derivatives in a column vector. Then sum over the elements of that vector. At the end your function should return a scalar, i.e. one value. 

__5.5 Cross-Entropy Cost Function__  
Write a function computing the total cost from the __2D__ column vectors of predictions and observations:
```python
def cross_entropy_cost(y_vals, y_preds):

  # Your code here

```

## 6. Classifier
The core of the action.

Luckily a skeleton is provided. You will have to replace the statments `# ... ` by proper code. It will mostly consist of calling the functions you defined in the previous section.

Test your code frequently. To do so, you can assign dummy temporary values for the variables you do not use yet, so that python knows they are defined and your code can run. 
````{margin}
```{admonition} Tip init
:class: tip
For initialization, use the [NumPy `random` routine](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/generated/numpy.random.rand.html) to generate random numbers between 0 and 1.
```
```{note}
The shape of the partial derivatives vector is provided (to help you). Now you need to call the function properly to get the values for $\frac{\partial}{\partial \theta_j} J(\theta)$ !
```
```{admonition} Tip partial derivatives
:class: tip
For extracting a given column in your $X$ matrix, a good keyword to look for is 'array slicing'. I stop giving you hints now.
```
````
```python
# Hyperparameters
alpha = # ...
N =  # ... epochs

# Number of features + 1 (number of columns in X)
n = # ...

# Initialization of theta *row vector*
thetas = # ...

# Storing cost values for train and test datasets
costs_train = [] 
costs_test  = []

print("Starting gradient descent\n")

# -------------------
#   Start iterations
# -------------------
for i in range(1, N+1):

  # Get predictions (hypothesis function)
  y_preds = # ...
  y_preds_test = # ...

  # Calculate and store costs with train and test datasets
  J_train = cross_entropy_cost(y_train, y_preds); costs_train.append(J_train)
  J_test  = cross_entropy_cost(y_test, y_preds_test); costs_test.append(J_test)

  # Get partial derivatives d/dTheta_j 
  dJ_thetas = np.zeros(shape=(1, n))

  # ...

  # Calculate new theta parameters:
  thetas_new = # ...

  # Update the parameters for the next iteration
  # ...

  # --------------------
  #  P R I N T O U T S
  # --------------------
  # Every 10 iterations and n > 100 every 100 iterations
  if (i<100 and i % 10 == 0) or (i>100 and i % 100 == 0):
    print('[%d]\tt0 = %4.4f  t1 = %4.4f  t2 = %4.4f  Cost = %4.4f  dJ0 = %4.4f  dJ1 = %4.4f  dJ2 = %4.4f' %
         ( i,   thetas[0,0], thetas[0,1], thetas[0,2],   J_train,  dJ_thetas[0,0],   dJ_thetas[0,1],   dJ_thetas[0,2]))

print(f'\nEnd of gradient descent after {i} iterations')

print('Optimized thetas:')
print(f'Theta 0 = {thetas[0,0]:.4f}, Theta 1 = {thetas[0,1]:.4f}, Theta 2 = {thetas[0,2]:.4f}')
```

If you struggle or cannot finish, summarize in your notebook your trials and investigations.

````{margin}
```{note}
If your classifier does not work, you can still answer the questions in Part 7.
```
````
## 7. Plot cost versus epochs
Use the following macro to plot the variation of the total cost vs the iteration number:
```python
def plot_cost_vs_iter(train_costs, test_costs, title="Gradient Descent: Cost evolution"):
  
  fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(8, 6))

  iters = np.arange(1,len(train_costs)+1)

  ax.plot(iters, train_costs, color='red', lw=1, label='Training set')
  ax.plot(iters, test_costs, color='blue', lw=1, label='Testing set')

  ax.set_xlabel("Number of iterations")
  ax.set_ylabel(r"Cost $J(\theta)$", rotation="horizontal")
  ax.yaxis.set_label_coords(-0.2, 0.5)

  ax.legend(loc="upper right", frameon=False)
  ax.set_title(title, fontsize=18, pad=20)
  plt.show()
```
Call this macro:
```python
plot_cost_vs_iter(costs_train, costs_test)
```
You should get something like this:
```{figure} ../images/a01_cost_vs_N.png
---
  name: a01_cost_vs_N
  width: 90%
---
```

__7.1: Describe the plot; what is the fundamental difference between the two series train and test?__  

__7.2: What would it mean if there would be a bigger gap between the test and training values of the cost?__  


````{margin}
```{admonition} Stuck? Ask me.
:class: warning
If you are stuck with the classifier, notify me and I will provide you with some $\boldsymbol{\theta}$ vector. 
```
````
## 8. Performance
We will write our own functions to quantitatively assess the performance of the classifier.

Before counting the true and false predictions, we need... predictions! We already wrote a function `h_class` outputting a prediction as a __continuous variable between 0 and 1__, equivalent to a probabilitiy. The function below is calling `h_class` and then fills a __python list__ of binary predictions, so either 0 or 1. For the boundary, recall in the lecture that the sigmoid is symmetric around y = 0.5, so we will work with this boundary for now. Copy this to your notebook:
```python
def make_predictions(thetas, X, y, boundary=0.5):

  bin_preds = [1 if value > boundary else 0 for value in h_class(X, np.array(thetas))[:,0] ] 

  return bin_preds
```
Call the function:
```python
preds = make_predictions(thetas, X_test, y_test, 0.5)
```
We will work with lists from now on, so flatten the observed test values:
```python
# Turn y_test into 1D array:
obs_test = y_test[:,0]
```

__8.1 Accuracy__  
Write a function computing the accuracy of the classifier:
```python
def get_accuracy(obs_values, pred_values):

  # Your code here

```
Call your function __using the test set__ and print the result.

__8.2 Recall__

```python
def get_recall(obs_values, pred_values):

  # Your code here

```
Call your function, still with the test set of course, and print the result.

BRAVO! You know now the math behind a binary classifier! 

## X. BONUS: Decision Boundaries
This is for advanced programmers and/or your curiosity and/or if you have the time. Bonus points will be given even if you answer with math equations only and not necessarily the associated python code. Of course you if you succeed in getting the python, more bonus points for you! 

__Goal__  
We want to draw on a scatter plot the lines corresponding to different decision boundaries.

```{tip}
Scroll down at the very end to see where we are heading to.
```

__X.0 Scatter plot__  
The first step is to split the signal and background into two different dataframes. Using the general dataframe `df` defined at the beginning:
```python
all_sig = df[df['type'] == 'electron'][['shower_depth', 'shower_width']]
all_bkg = df[df['type'] ==  'hadron' ][['shower_depth', 'shower_width']]
```
The plotting macro:

```python
X1NAME = 'shower_depth'; X1LABEL = 'Shower depth [mm]'
X2NAME = 'shower_width'; X2LABEL = 'Shower width [mm]'
X1MIN  = 0 ; X1MAX = 200 
X2MIN  = 0 ; X2MAX =  60 

# Raw scatter plot
def plot_scatter(sig, bkg, boundaries=False,
                 x1name=X1NAME, x1label=X1LABEL, x1min=X1MIN, x1max=X1MAX,
                 x2name=X2NAME, x2label=X2LABEL, x2min=X2MIN, x2max=X2MAX,
                 figsize=(6, 6), fontsize=20, alpha=0.2, title="Scatter plot"):

  fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=figsize)

  # ------------------
  #      A X E S  
  # ------------------
  ax.set(xlim=(x1min, x1max), ylim=(x2min, x2max))
  ax.set_xlabel(x1label); ax.set_ylabel(x2label)

  # ------------------
  #   S C A T T E R   
  # ------------------
  scat_el = ax.scatter(sig[x1name], sig[x2name], marker='.', s=1, c='dodgerblue', alpha=alpha)
  scat_had= ax.scatter(bkg[x1name], bkg[x2name], marker='.', s=1, c='darkorange', alpha=alpha)
  
  # ----------------------
  #  B O U N D A R I E S
  # ----------------------
  #if boundaries: 
    # ... stuff to do here

  # ------------------
  #   L E G E N D S 
  # ------------------
  # Legend scatter
  h = [scat_el, scat_had]
  legScatter = ax.legend(handles=h, labels=['electron', 'hadron'],
                         title="Shower type\n", title_fontsize=fontsize, markerscale=20,
                         bbox_to_anchor=(1.06, 0.8), loc="center left" , frameon=False)
  
  # Legend boundary
  if boundaries:
    ax.add_artist(legScatter)
    legLines = ax.legend(title="Decision boundaries", 
                       bbox_to_anchor=(1.06, 0.3), loc="center left", 
                       title_fontsize=fontsize, frameon=False)

  ax.set_title(title, fontsize=fontsize, pad=20)
  print('\n\n') ; plt.show()
```
To call it:
```python
plot_scatter(all_sig, all_bkg,
             figsize=(6, 6), fontsize=20, alpha=0.2, title="Calorimeter Showers")
```

__X.1 Useful functions__  
Recall the logistic function:
```{math}
\hat{y} = \frac{1}{1 + e^{-z}}
```
Write a function `rev_sigmoid` that outputs the value $z = f(\hat{y})$. 

Write a function `scale_inputs` that scales a list of raw input features, either $x_1$ or $x_2$, according to the standardization procedure.

Write the function `unscale_inputs` that does the contrary.


__X.2 Equation__  
For a given threshold $\hat{y}$, write the equation of the line boundary: $x_2 = f(\boldsymbol{\theta}, x_1, \hat{y})$.
````{margin}
```{admonition} Caution with notations
:class: warning
In our situation, the $x$ axis corresponds to $x_1$ and the $y$ axis to $x_2$.
```
````
__X.3 Boundary line coordinates__  
To draw a line on a plot in Matplotlib, one needs to provide the coordinates as a set of two data points: `[x_min, x_max], [y_left, y_right]`. The `y_left` correspond to the $x$ coordinate `x_min`, and `y_right` to `x_max`. 

Write a function that compute the coordinates `x2_left` and `x2_right` of a decision boundary line at a given threshold $\hat{y}$. (recall 0.5 is the standard one for logistic regression). 
```python
def get_boundary_line_x2(threshold, thetas, x1min=X1MIN, x1max=X1MAX):

  # Your code here


```
Warrior-level bonus: compute this for several thresholds, i.e. the function returns a list of line properties. Tip: it's convenient to store the result in a dictionary. For instance you can have keys `threshold`, `x2_left`, `x2_right`. 

__X.4 Plotting the boundaries (advanced)__  
In the scatter plot code provided, uncomment the boundary section and draw the line(s) using the Matplotlib `plot` function.
```python
   #... 
   ax.plot([x1min, x1max], [x2_left, x2_right], color='r', ls='-', lw=2)
   #... 
```

In the very end, this is how it would render:

```{figure} ../images/a01_scatter_with_boundaries.png
---
  name: a01_scatter_with_boundaries
  width: 90%
---
Scatter plot of electron and hadron showers with decision boundary lines for various thresholds.  
 <sub>Code will be shown while releasing solutions.</sub>
```

The higher the threshold, the more the boundary line shifts downwards in the electron-dense area. Why is that the case?




```{important}
&nbsp;  
You are encouraged to work in groups, however submissions are individual.

If you have received help from your peers and/or have worked within a group, summarize in the header of your notebook the involved students, how they helped you and the contributions of each group member. This is to ensure fairness in the evaluation.

You can use the internet such as the official pages of relevant libraries, forum websites to debug, etc. However, using an AI such as ChatGPT would be considered cheating (and not good for you anyway to develop your programming skills).

The instructor and tutors are available throughout the week to answer your questions. Write an email with your well-articulated question(s). Put in CC your teammates if any.

Thank you and do not forget to have fun while coding!
```